
### Gender, Documentation, and Communities of Statistical Computing

*Simon P. Couch*

This is a research compendium for a term paper for SOC 322 (Gender &
Work) at Reed College in Fall 2019.

I argue that code documentation in the tidyverse is written more
effectively and inclusively than other R code documentation, and that
this is meaningful for understanding gender representation in the user
community.

Initially, I trace the literature articulating supply-side mechanisms
for gendered occupational segregation, showing that the work of gender
minorities in STEM is subjected to greater scrutiny than that of their
cisgender men counterparts. Further, too, gender minorities in these
fields are more likely to incorporate this negative feedback, as well as
their awareness of masculine elements of their physical surroundings,
into their self-perceptions of their competence and identity alignment
with the stereotypical worker. Collectively, these mechanisms coalesce
into a system of exclusion discouraging gender minorities from pursuing
careers in some STEM fields.

I argue that these mechanisms are at play in the context of statistical
computing, which incorporates methodological and cultural elements from
many STEM fields and, further, that code documentation in statistical
computing settings is capable of both delivering feedback about
competence and transmitting norms about the stereotypical worker.

Through interviews with women in these fields, I developed a set of
measures to quantify the effectiveness and inclusiveness of code
documentation, and analytically showed that, using these measures, code
documentation from the tidyverse is more effectively and inclusively
written than code outside of the tidyverse. These interviews also
allowed me to more thoroughly scrutinize this association between gender
minority representation in the tidyverse and the increased quality of
documentation arising from the community. The interviewees articulated
several confounding factors, as well as supply-side mechanisms, relating
these two phenomenaâ€”namely, I argue that increased documentation
effectiveness and inclusivity are a likely mechanism for the greater
representation of gender minorities in tidyverse development
communities, and also that, in turn, this greater representation
contributes to more effectively and inclusively written documentation.
That said, the confounding factors highlighted in the interviews are
also plausible mechanisms driving this association, and the evidence
provided is not sufficient to fully articulate a causal mechanism in
either direction.
